.\" Manpage for exex.
.\" Contact rabarbrablad@gmail.com to correct errors or typos.
.TH EXEX 1 "2026-07-01" "exex" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
exex \- terminal UI for exploring ELF, Mach-O and PE binaries
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B exex
.RB [ \-debug
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-s
.IR STRING ]
.RB [ \-o
.RI [ VIEW ]]
.I binary
.RI [ goto ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B exex
is a keyboard- and mouse-driven terminal user interface for exploring
executable files in the
.BR ELF ,
.B Mach-O
and
.B PE
formats. It presents the file header, sections, segments, symbols,
disassembly, hex and raw byte dumps, printable strings, dynamic libraries,
and \(em when the binary carries debug info (DWARF, or a Mach-O
.IR .dSYM )
\(em the original source side by side with the disassembly it maps to,
navigable in both directions.
.PP
With the
.B \-o
flag,
.B exex
runs non-interactively: it prints a view (or a function's disassembly) to
standard output and exits, making it scriptable like the classic binary
inspection tools.
.PP
If
.I binary
is not a recognised binary but a readable text file (a shell, Python or other
script \(em still "executable"),
.B exex
opens it in a read-only text viewer; see
.BR "TEXT SCRIPTS" .
.SH OPTIONS
Flags may appear in any position on the command line.
.TP
.BI \-debug " PATH" "\fR, \fP" \-d " PATH"
Path to an external debug-symbols file or directory: an ELF
.B .debug
companion, or a Mach-O
.B .dSYM
bundle or file. Tried before the conventional auto-discovered locations.
.TP
.BI \-s " STRING"
Search the printable strings on startup. A single match opens the Hex view at
it; several matches open the Strings view filtered by it.
.TP
.BI \-arch " NAME"
For a universal (fat) Mach-O, which architecture slice to open (e.g.
.BR x86_64 ,
.BR arm64 ).
Defaults to the host architecture, else the first slice. The Info view lists all
slices; press
.B t
there to switch between them. Ignored for thin Mach-O and other formats.
.TP
.BI \-o " VIEW"
Print
.I VIEW
to standard output and exit, without starting the TUI. Recognised views:
.BR info ,
.BR sections ,
.BR segments ,
.BR symbols ,
.BR strings ,
.BR libs ,
.BR sources ,
.B relocs
(relocation table, like
.BR "readelf \-r" ),
.B syscalls
(distinct system calls, with recovered numbers and vDSO calls),
.B syscalls-all
(every syscall site with its address),
.B syscalls-full
(distinct syscalls of the binary and its linked libraries, tagged with origin),
.B disasm
(executable sections, like
.BR "objdump \-d" )
and
.B disasm-all
(every section, like
.BR "objdump \-D" ).
The disassembly output streams, so piping to
.BR head (1)
or
.BR less (1)
returns immediately even on large binaries.
.TP
.B \-o
Bare, with no view: print the
.I goto
symbol or address's function disassembly to standard output and exit.
.TP
.B \-h
Print a usage summary and exit.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I binary
Path to an ELF, Mach-O or PE file, or a command name found on
.BR $PATH
(for example
.B exex ls
opens
.BR /bin/ls ).
.TP
.I goto
Optional address
.RB ( 0x401000 )
or symbol name to act on. Interactively, it jumps there on open: a unique
symbol jumps straight to it, an ambiguous one opens the Symbols view filtered
by it. With a bare
.BR \-o ,
it selects the function to disassemble.
.SH KEYS
The following keys drive the interactive UI; press
.B ?
for the full in-app reference.
.TP
.BR 1\(en9 / 0
Switch view: Info, Sections, Symbols, Disasm, Hex, Raw, Strings, Libs, Sources;
.B 0
opens Relocations.
.TP
.BR \[u2191] / \[u2193] ", " j / k ", " PgUp / PgDn ", " Home / End
Move and page (also
.BR \(haA / \(haE
and Cmd-Up/Cmd-Down on macOS).
.TP
.B /
Filter or search the current view.
.TP
.B Enter
Open, follow, or jump.
.TP
.B g
Go to an address or symbol.
.TP
.B ,
Open the settings popup (theme, background, default wrap, default view); changes
apply live and are saved to the config file when it is writable.
.TP
.BR [ / ]
Page up/down in the list views; previous/next section (Hex, Raw) or symbol
(Disasm).
.TP
.BR d / h / m
Go to the address under the cursor in the Disassembly, Hex or Raw view
(from the Sections, Symbols, Strings, Hex, Raw and Disassembly views).
Disassembly requires the target to be executable; Raw requires it to have
bytes on disk.
.TP
.BR s / r
In the list views, cycle the sort field
.RB ( s )
and reverse the current order
.RB ( r ).
Sections sort by index, name, address or size; Symbols by name, address or size;
Strings by offset, address or string; Sources by project-order or name; Libraries
by name.
.TP
.BR \(hatT / \(hatS / \(hatB / \(hatF / \(hatP
Cycle a column filter (Ctrl + the column's first letter). Symbols:
.B \(hatT
type,
.B \(hatS
scope,
.B \(hatB
bind. Sections:
.B \(hatT
type,
.B \(hatF
flags. Strings:
.B \(hatS
owning section. Relocations:
.B \(hatT
type and
.B \(hatS
section. Libraries and Sources:
.B \(hatP
availability.
A search box
.RB ( / )
filters every list view (Sections, Symbols, Strings, Libraries, Relocations,
Sources), and
.B Esc
clears the search text and all column filters at once.
.TP
.BR t " (or " Tab )
Outside the disassembly view,
.B Tab
is an alias for
.BR t .
In the Info view,
.B t
switches to the next architecture slice of a universal (fat)
Mach-O. In the Symbols, Sources and Libraries views, toggle a collapsible tree
that groups names by namespace/path (C++/Swift scopes, or
.RB \(dq / \(dq
path components) instead of a flat list; in the Sections view it toggles between
sections and segments, and in the Hex/Raw views between the ascii column and the
pointer-word decode. In the tree,
.BR \[u2190] / \[u2192]
collapse/expand the current group one level (Left on a leaf folds its branch),
.B Enter
expands or collapses the whole subtree below (or opens a leaf), and
.BR + / \-
expand or collapse every group. These keys are rebindable
.RB ( tree_expand ,
.BR tree_collapse ,
.BR tree_expand_all ,
.BR tree_collapse_all ).
The per-view startup defaults
.RB ( tree_symbols ,
.BR tree_sources ,
.BR tree_libs ,
.BR tree_collapsed )
are set in the config or the settings popup.
.TP
.BR e / .
In the Symbols view, collapse the contents of every parenthesised
.RB ( ... )
and angle-bracketed
.RB ( <...> )
group \(em template arguments and parameter lists \(em to an ellipsis. Short
contents (5 bytes or fewer, such as
.RB \(dq <int> \(dq )
are kept as-is.
.B e
toggles all rows;
.B .
toggles the row under the cursor. While the all-rows toggle is on, the same
abbreviation is applied to symbol names shown in the disassembly labels and the
disassembly, hex/raw and pointer-follow annotations;
.B e
also toggles it from the Disassembly, Hex and Raw views. The
.B abbrev_args
config option (and the settings popup) sets the startup default.
.TP
.BR Shift-a / Shift-s / Shift-p / Shift-c
Copy: address
.RB ( Shift-a );
name
.RB ( Shift-s ,
the section/segment, symbol, string, library or source path of the current row);
the pointer word at the cursor
.RB ( Shift-p ,
Hex/Raw); the disassembly of the current function
.RB ( Shift-c ,
Disasm); and the whole current row, every column
.RB ( Shift-l ,
all row-based views).
.TP
.BR x / y
Find cross-references to the address under the cursor, or list system calls
(Disasm).
.TP
.B Shift-f
Scan and list CPU-feature families used by the executable code.
.TP
.B w
Toggle long-line wrapping.
.TP
.BR Tab / Shift-Tab
Show/hide and swap the disassembly source pane.
.TP
.B q
Quit.
.PP
The mouse wheel scrolls, a click selects, and a double-click follows in the
disassembly view.
.SH TEXT SCRIPTS
When
.I binary
is a readable text file rather than a compiled binary (a shell, Python or other
script),
.B exex
shows it in a read-only, syntax-highlighted text viewer. Two kinds of token are
underlined as openable links and can be opened from a picker menu
.RB ( Enter
or
.BR o ):
filesystem paths that resolve to a real file (absolute,
.IR ~ -relative,
or relative to the script's own directory), and bare command names found on
.B $PATH
(the interpreters and tools the script invokes, such as
.BR bash ,
.B python3
or
.BR grep ).
Opening a referenced binary switches to the full explorer; opening another text
file shows it in the viewer, with
.B Esc
to go back. This mode is interactive only and is not combined with
.BR \-o .
.SH CONFIGURATION
Configuration is optional YAML loaded from
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/exex/config.yaml
or, when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset,
.BR $HOME/.config/exex/config.yaml .
Every field is optional; unset entries keep their defaults. It can select a
built-in theme preset, override individual colours, rebind top-level keys, and
set behaviour (default view, default wrap, default tree view, disassembly
landing target, decode window size). See the annotated
.B config.example.yaml
shipped with the distribution for the full schema.
.PP
A subset of these preferences can also be changed from inside the TUI: press
.B ,
to open the settings popup, which adjusts the theme, the view/pane background,
default wrap, the default view and the default tree view live. On confirm it
writes them back to the
config file; if that file is not writable, the change still applies for the
current session.
.SH FILES
.TP
.B $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/exex/config.yaml
User configuration (falls back to
.BR $HOME/.config/exex/config.yaml ).
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Runtime error (for example the file could not be opened, or an
.B \-o
target could not be resolved).
.TP
.B 2
Usage error (bad or missing arguments).
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Open a binary in the TUI:
.B exex ./a.out
.TP
Open at a symbol:
.B exex ./a.out main
.TP
List symbols to stdout:
.B exex \-o symbols ./a.out
.TP
Disassemble all executable sections, paged:
.B exex \-o disasm ./a.out | less
.TP
Disassemble one function:
.B exex \-o ./a.out main
.TP
Use an external dSYM:
.B exex \-d ./a.out.dSYM ./a.out
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR objdump (1),
.BR readelf (1),
.BR nm (1),
.BR strings (1),
.BR hexdump (1),
.BR addr2line (1),
.BR otool (1),
.BR gdb (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Polina Simonenko <rabarbrablad@gmail.com>
.SH LICENSE
MIT.
